Project Gutenberg's Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah (1952), by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah (1952)

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 10, 2019 [EBook #59881]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRYCE CANYON NATIONAL PARK ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              Bryce Canyon
                         NATIONAL PARK · _Utah_


    [Illustration: DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR · March 3, 1849]

                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                     Oscar L. Chapman, _Secretary_

                         NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
                      Conrad L. Wirth, _Director_




                               _Contents_


  Panorama of Bryce Canyon                                       _Cover_
  Geology of Bryce Canyon National Park                                4
  How to Reach the Park                                                8
  Roads and Trails                                                     8
  Administration                                                      10
  Naturalist Services                                                 10
  Museum                                                              10
  Free Public Campgrounds                                             10
  Accommodations                                                      10
  Transportation                                                      12
  Saddle Horses                                                       12
  Post Office and Communication Service                               13
  Miscellaneous Services                                              13
  Cedar Breaks National Monument                                      15




                           _Historic Events_


  1866      Capt. James Andrus in command of a military expedition from
            St. George, Utah, crossed the Paria River a few miles south
            of Bryce Canyon.
  1872      A. H. Thompson, geographer of the Powell Survey, sketched
            the topography of the Pink Cliffs eastward to Rainbow Point
            and ascended Table Cliffs. Lt. W. L. Marshall, topographer,
            and G. K. Gilbert and E. E. Howell of the Wheeler Survey
            mapped, described, and illustrated for the first time the
            features of the park north of Campbell Canyon.
  1874-76   Scattered settlements established in the Upper Paria
            Valley. Ebenezer Bryce, for whom the park is named, ranged
            cattle in the area. The region that includes Bryce Canyon
            National Park studied by Capt. C. E. Dutton. View from
            Sunset Point described (1876) by T. C. Bailey, Deputy U. S.
            Surveyor.
  1877      Cannonville and Henrieville founded.
  1905      The Paunsaugunt Plateau, which includes the park, set aside
            as Powell National Forest.
  1923      Bryce Canyon National Monument established by Presidential
            proclamation.
  1924      Act of Congress authorized the establishment of Utah
            National Park, subject to extinguishment of private land
            titles.
  1928      Name changed from Utah National Park to Bryce Canyon
            National Park; park established.

    [Illustration: Decorated Capital]

Bryce Canyon National Park includes some of the most interesting
exposures of the Pink Cliffs formation, whose rocks are among the most
colorful of any forming the earth's crust. The major beauty spots of the
area are found where forces of erosion have cut back into the plateau,
forming amphitheaters or wide canyons filled with pinnacles and
grotesque forms.

Most of the park area, with some 30 miles of Pink Cliffs, can be seen
from Rainbow Point, at the southern end of the park. Included in this
panorama are such beautiful amphitheaters as Black Birch Canyon, Agua
Canyon, and Willis Creek. In addition, there are magnificent views
across "the land of the purple sage" to Navajo Mountain, 80 miles to the
east, and to the Kaibab Plateau and the Trumbull Mountains to the south,
the latter 99 miles distant.

In reality Bryce is not a canyon; rather it is a great horseshoe-shaped
bowl or amphitheater cut by water erosion into the Paunsaugunt Plateau
and extending down a thousand feet through its pink and white marly
limestone. The character of the area is well indicated by the Paiute
Indian name, "Unka-timpe-wa-wince-pock-ich," which is translated as,
"red rocks standing like men in a bowl-shaped canyon." The largest
amphitheater is 3 miles long and about 2 miles wide, and is filled with
myriads of fantastic figures cut by weathering influences. Its domes,
spires, and temples are decorated in all the colors of the spectrum.

The area was reserved as Bryce Canyon National Monument by Presidential
proclamation, June 8, 1923. The act of June 7, 1924, authorized its
establishment as Utah National Park when certain conditions regarding
land acquisition had been met. The act of February 25, 1928, changed the
name from Utah National Park to Bryce Canyon National Park and
materially increased the size of the area. On September 15, 1928, when
all alienated lands within the proposed park area were transferred to
the United States, in accordance with the act of June 7, 1924, Bryce
Canyon National Park was established. The park now embraces more than
36,000 acres under Federal ownership.

Bryce Canyon National Park is one of the areas of the National Park
System owned by the people of the United States and administered for
them by the National Park Service, Department of the Interior. In these
areas the scenery and the objects of historic, prehistoric, and
scientific interest are carefully preserved and displayed for public
enjoyment.




                Geology of Bryce Canyon National Park[1]


_Regional Features._--In Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks the type
of scenery peculiar to the plateaus of southern Utah and northern
Arizona attains its most complete expression. Layer upon layer of shales
and sandstones have been carved into architectural forms, astonishingly
alike for size and color. The long stretches of even skyline seen on
approaching the parks from Cedar City (west), Panguitch (north), and
Grand Canyon (south) give an impression of extensive flat surfaces that
terminate in lines of cliffs, but viewpoints within the parks reveal a
ruggedness possessed by few other regions. The canyons are so narrow, so
deep, and so thickly interlaced, and the edges of the strata so
continuously exposed that the region seems made up of gorges, cliffs,
and mesas intimately associated with a marvelous variety of minor
erosion forms. The parks might be considered as mountainous regions in
which departures of many thousand feet from a general surface are
downward rather than upward.

The canyons and adjoining terraces are spectacular illustrations of
erosion. They show with diagrammatic clearness the work of running
water, rain, frost, and wind, of ground water and chemical agencies
active throughout a long period of time. The horizontal tables and
benches, broken by vertical lines that in distant view appear to
dominate the landscape, are normal features of erosion of plateau lands
in an arid climate. The tabular forms are the edges and surfaces of hard
strata from which softer layers have been stripped. The vertical lines
mark the position of fractures (joints)--lines of weakness which erosion
enlarges into grooves and miniature canyons. As they entrench themselves
in horizontal layers of rock that vary in resistance to erosion, the
master streams and their tributaries are developing stairlike profiles
on their enclosing walls. Cliffs in resistant rocks and slopes in weak
rock constitute risers and treads that vary in steepness and height with
the thickness of the strata involved. Thus near the south entrance to
Zion Park the edge of a layer of hard conglomerate is a vertical cliff,
its top a platform. Above this platform a long slope of shale, broken by
many benches developed in hard beds, extends upward to the great cliff
faces of West Temple and the Watchman. In front of Zion Lodge a slope of
weak shales leads upward to a cliff of resistant sandstone above which a
slope of shale extends to the vertical wall of Lady Mountain. In Bryce
Canyon the rim road is on the highest tread of a giant rock stairway
that, as viewed from Rainbow Point, leads downward in steps 30 to 400
feet high to the flat lands 3,000 feet below.

    [Illustration: _View of multicolored formations from Bryce Point_
    (_Union Pacific Railroad photo_)]

The streams at work in the parks, though relatively small, have steep
gradients, including rapids and waterfalls, and are supplied with
disintegrated rock material swept from the ledges by torrential rains
about as fast as formed. They are therefore powerful agents of erosion,
especially in times of flood. The fresh, sharp, angular profile of
mesas, ridges, and canyon walls and the extensive areas of bare rock are
maintained by the rapid down-cutting and prompt removal of rock waste.
The resulting land forms reflect the aridity and the topographic youth
of southern Utah and contrast strongly with the rounded hills, broad
valleys, plant-covered slopes, and deep soils of more humid regions.

_Geologic History._--A large part of geologic history is revealed in the
canyon walls of Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks. Just as Grand
Canyon is the best known record of ancient geologic history, Zion Canyon
records most clearly the events of medieval geological time, and Bryce
reveals much of modern geologic history. The story of Zion begins where
that of Grand Canyon ends, and ends where Bryce begins. The rocks
exposed in these three national parks incorporate the records of a
billion years.

    [Illustration: _Generalized section of sediments in Zion and Bryce
    Canyons_]

  Age of rocks      Formation

                                    lava
  Eocene       Wasatch: Pink Cliffs                ROCKS IN BRYCE CANYON PARK
  MESOZOIC
  Cretaceous   Undifferentiated: Gray Cliffs
                                    sandstone
                                    shale
                                    coal
  Jurassic
                                    gypsum
               Carmel               limestone
               Navajo sandstone:    cross-bedded   ROCKS IN ZION PARK
               White Cliffs         sandstone
               Kayenta-Wingate
  Triassic
               Chinle: Vermilion    shale,
               Cliffs               sandstone,
                                    ash and
                                    limestone
                                    fossil wood
               Shinarump conglomerate
               Moenkopi: Belted     shale
               Cliffs
                                    sandstone
                                    oil            RIM OF GRAND CANYON
  Permian      Kaibab limestone

A study of the rocks of Zion and Bryce Canyon shows that during the last
200,000,000 years the region comprising the parks has witnessed many
changes in landscape and climate. At times it was covered by the sea, at
other times broad rivers traversed its surface, and at still other times
it was swept by desert winds. Most of the rocks were laid down by water
as gravel, sand, mud, and limy ooze. They have been converted into solid
rock by the weight of layers above them and by lime, silica, and the
iron that cement their grains. Embedded in the rocks are fossil sea
shells, fish, trees, snails, and the bones and tracks of land animals
that sought their food on flood plains, in forests, or among sand dunes.
The most conspicuous remains are those of dinosaurs--huge reptiles that
so dominated the life of their time that the Mesozoic is known as the
"age of dinosaurs."

The accumulation of some 8,000 feet of strata (Mesozoic and Tertiary) on
top of 4,000 feet of older (Paleozoic) beds, which are exposed in Grand
Canyon, may be considered the first of three major events in the
development of the marvelous landscapes of the Zion-Bryce region; it
provided the material from which the huge scenic features were later
carved. The second event was a regional uplift which elevated the
previously low-lying top beds of the series (Wasatch, Pink Cliffs) to a
height of nearly 2 miles above sea level. As a result of this movement,
the earth's crust was broken into huge rectangular blocks by north-south
fractures or faults. Three of these great faults can be seen in the
vicinity of the parks: the Hurricane fault in the Hurricane Cliffs, west
of Zion; the Paunsaugunt fault in the cliffs of Bryce; and the Sevier
fault along the Mount Carmel Road between the two parks.

In consequence of the uplift the third major event, the present cycle of
erosion, was initiated. The streams became strong and swift and so were
able to cut deeply into the underlying rock and carry away the land
waste. In this process the streams have removed many cubic miles of
rocks, which, if replaced, would fill the present canyons and build up
their bordering land to the level of the lofty Markagunt and Paunsaugunt
Plateaus. The gigantic features of Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks
mark a stage in the process of erosion that began long ago and which, if
continued without interruption, will convert the present rugged
landscape into plains near sea level.

_Distinctive Features of Bryce Canyon._--In its regional setting Bryce
Canyon National Park is the southeastern border of the extensive
Paunsaugunt Plateau. It comprises two areas of strongly contrasted
topography that meet in a line that marks the rim of the plateau and the
top of its bordering cliffs. Back from the rim the plateau surface on
which the park buildings and the automobile roads have been constructed
is generally flat land traversed by broad, shallow valleys in which
erosion is inconspicuous. Below the rim erosion has produced a region of
remarkable ruggedness. It might naturally be supposed that the beautiful
amphitheater at the head of Bryce Canyon had been carved by waters
pouring down from the plateau above. But the plateau streams contribute
nothing; they flow away from the rim. The chief sculpturing agents are
the rain and snow that fall directly into the canyon. In producing the
amazing variety of erosion features the streams have been aided by frost
that pries fragments from the cliffs and by chemical agencies that
decompose the rock and supply its vivid color.

The development of the park landscape was made possible by movements
within the earth's crust which brought originally low-lying strata to an
altitude exceeding 8,000 feet. Streamways on the flat top of this
uplifted block were little affected, but with greatly steepened
gradients the streams around the borders of the newly made plateau
became powerful. The Paria and its swiftly flowing tributaries have cut
deeply into the face of the Paunsaugunt and carried billions of tons of
ground-up rock to the Colorado. At the present time erosion by Bryce
Creek, Yellow Creek, Willis Creek, Podunk Creek, and many smaller
streams, is causing the plateau face to retreat northwestward, and these
streams are taking into their drainage areas channels that formerly
carried waters northward to Sevier River.

The drab-colored landscape along the southeast border of the park has
been developed in alternating beds of shale, coal, and sandstone
(Cretaceous age); in the resulting erosion forms, slopes, mounds,
rounded ridges, and valleys with inclined or steplike sides predominate.
The brightly colored rocks that form the topmost cliffs and terminate
abruptly in such headlands as Steamboat Mountain, Bryce Point, and
Rainbow Point are resistant limestones of Tertiary age (Wasatch
formation). They erode as vertical walls (Pink Cliffs), which weathering
has developed into the astonishing display of architectural forms that
make Bryce Canyon distinctive.




                         How to Reach the Park


In going to Bryce Canyon National Park the motorist turns east from the
main highway, U S 89, 7 miles south of the town of Panguitch, Utah. From
that junction it is 25 miles to the park. This road follows Red Canyon,
a brilliantly colored little gorge which is often mistaken for Bryce
Canyon itself. The approach to Bryce is unusual; no evidence of the
canyon is visible until the visitor walks to the rim and suddenly has
revealed to him the great sight in all its breath-taking beauty.
Improved highways make Bryce Canyon National Park easily accessible
except during the winter.

Travelers by rail may reach the park over the Union Pacific Railroad to
Cedar City, Utah, the gateway to Zion, Bryce Canyon, and Grand Canyon
(North Rim) National Parks and Cedar Breaks National Monument. Motor
buses of the Utah Parks Co. operate to those areas.

Main bus lines operate from Salt Lake City and Los Angeles to Cedar
City, where passengers going to the park may transfer to buses of the
Utah Parks Co. On prior notice, connections may be made with the Santa
Fe Trails System at Marysvale or Panguitch.

United Air Lines serves Salt Lake City, and from there passengers may go
by Union Pacific Railroad or bus to Cedar City. Air service is also
available from Los Angeles by Western Air Lines, with stops at Las
Vegas, Cedar City, and Salt Lake City.




                            Roads and Trails


The National Park Service has completed an excellent road, 20 miles
long, which follows the high rim the full length of the park plateau.
Short spurs lead to such scenic places as Inspiration Point, Bryce
Point, Paria View, Natural Bridge, and Rainbow Point.

    [Illustration: _Bryce Canyon National Park_
                      Drawn by R. M. Montesano January 1947 NP.B.C. 7012]

                             ROAD DISTANCES
                       To points Outside the Park

        To Salt Lake City                                 270 Mi.
        To Los Angeles                                    573 Mi.
        To Cedar City                                      85 Mi.
        To Panguitch                                       26 Mi.
        To Cedar Breaks                                    67 Mi.
        To Zion Canyon                                     89 Mi.
        To Grand Canyon (North Rim)                       161 Mi.
        To Grand Canyon (South Rim)                       305 Mi.
        To Capitol Reef Nat. Mon.                         125 Mi.

                        To Points Within the Park
                          Checking Station to:

        Fairyland                                         1.2 Mi.
        Headquarters                                      1.6 Mi.
        Bryce Canyon Lodge                                1.8 Mi.
        Sunset Point                                      2.4 Mi.
        Inspiration Point                                 3.0 Mi.
        Bryce Point                                       4.7 Mi.
        Paria View                                        4.4 Mi.
        Natural Bridge                                   12.5 Mi.
        Rainbow Point                                    18.2 Mi.

                             TRAIL DISTANCES
                            Sunset Point to:

        Navajo-Comanche Loop & return                     1.5 Mi.
        Inspiration Point                                 1.0 Mi.
        Sunrise Point (Rim Trail)                         0.5 Mi.
        Bryce Point (Via Peek-a-boo Trail)               3.75 Mi.
        Campbell Canyon-Fairyland Loop & return           6.0 Mi.

The roads are open during the spring, summer, and fall. Those in the
vicinity of headquarters are kept open throughout the winter, except for
brief periods during and immediately following storms.

Fine horseback and foot trails have been built in the interesting area
under the rim. They lead into Queen's Garden, Silent City, Fairyland,
Wall Street, Peek-a-boo Canyon, and other more remote points--each with
its distinctive form. Trails are all easily traveled in good weather;
horseback trips can be arranged in half- or full-day units to suit the
individual. Inquiry should be made before attempting a trip, as stormy
weather sometimes makes the condition of these trails uncertain.




                             Administration


Bryce Canyon National Park is administered as a unit with Zion National
Park and Cedar Breaks and Zion National Monuments. The representative of
the National Park Service in immediate charge is the superintendent,
whose post office address is Springdale, Utah. All comments regarding
service in the park should be addressed to him.




                          Naturalist Services


Each evening illustrated talks are given by members of the staff, who
also conduct short hiking trips into Bryce Canyon every day of the
summer season, according to schedules posted by the naturalist service.

Visitors are urged to use these facilities, which are provided free of
charge by the Government.




                                 Museum


At park headquarters the National Park Service has established an
official information office and museum which is open daily throughout
the main travel season. Here park visitors may secure information and
free publications regarding this and other national parks. The museum
exhibits cover such subjects as geology, biology, archeology, and
history. The Zion-Bryce Natural History Association maintains a stock of
publications, maps, and transparency slides which are for sale at
reasonable prices in the museum. They are designed to assist in a better
understanding and appreciation of the region.




                        Free Public Campgrounds


An attractive public auto camp, maintained by the Government, is open
from about April 15 to November 15; however, these dates vary according
to weather conditions. Pure water and sanitary conveniences are
provided, and groceries and campers' supplies may be purchased at the
Bryce Camp store. Camping is limited to 30 days a year for each party.

For those not carrying their own equipment and desiring to visit the
park after the closing dates of the lodge and camp, there are camps near
the park where accommodations can be found at any time of the year.




                             Accommodations


An attractive lodge is operated by the Utah Parks Co. from about May 30
to September 25. It consists of a central building and cabins. The
cabins are standard and deluxe types, the latter having private bath,
porch, and fireplace.

    [Illustration: _Roads connecting Bryce Canyon, Zion, Grand Canyon,
    and Cedar Breaks_]

    [Illustration: _Bryce Canyon Lodge_ (_Union Pacific Railroad
    photo_)]

Meals are served in the lodge dining room.

There is also a cabin development which is open from about May 1 to
October 30. Here are available a cafeteria, food store, and sleeping
cabins. The cabins are equipped with electricity, running water, double
beds, table, sink, shelves, and chairs.

As prices are subject to change from season to season, no rates are
included in this booklet, but they may be obtained from the Utah Parks
Co., Cedar City, Utah.




                             Transportation


Motorbus transportation and all-expense tours to Zion, Bryce Canyon, and
Grand Canyon (North Rim) National Parks, Kaibab National Forest, and
Cedar Breaks National Monument are furnished by Utah Parks Co., Cedar
City, Utah, during the summer season and by special arrangement during
the remainder of the year. An automobile trip from Bryce Canyon Lodge to
Inspiration Point, Bryce Point, Paria View, Natural Bridge, and Rainbow
Point and return is offered during the summer.




                             Saddle Horses


Saddle horses may be hired by the hour or day. Daily escorted trips are
made into the canyon and to Natural Bridge. Special guide service, if
available, may also be obtained. Riding outfits for women may be rented
at the lodge.




                 Post Office and Communication Service


Bryce Canyon Lodge is provided with post office, telegraph, and
long-distance telephone service. The post office address during the
summer season when the lodge is operating is Bryce Canyon National Park,
Utah.




                         Miscellaneous Services


Fountain service is available in the lodge. Photographs of Bryce may be
purchased here, and laboratories are maintained for developing and
printing.

Curio stores, specializing in Indian handicraft, are operated. Curios,
post cards, and other items may be obtained at the cabin camps, which
also carry a complete line of foodstuffs.

    [Illustration: _Trails lead to the fantastically eroded formations_
    (_Union Pacific Railroad photo_)]

    [Illustration: _Motorists park on overlook for view of Cedar
    Breaks_]

Garage service, including storage and repairs, is provided near Bryce
Lodge during the main season. A regular service station, located on the
highway near the lodge, furnishes gasoline, oil, tires, and batteries
from approximately May 1 to October 30. Garages and service stations
outside the park usually operate throughout the year.

A registered nurse is on duty at the lodge when it is in operation.




                     Cedar Breaks National Monument


Twenty miles east of Cedar City, within the Dixie National Forest, where
the high plateau breaks away to the west, is a great amphitheater called
Cedar Breaks, in the Pink Cliffs formation. The more spectacular part of
the formation was established as a national monument by proclamation of
President Franklin D. Roosevelt on August 22, 1933, and placed under the
administration of the National Park Service. The monument embraces an
area of 6,172.20 acres of federally owned land.

While Cedar Breaks is cut from the same geological formation as Bryce
Canyon, there is a marked difference between these two scenic areas.
There are not countless numbers of outstanding temples, spires, and
minarets in the Cedar Breaks bowl, but Cedar Breaks is on a more
gigantic scale and has a greater variety of tints. The Pink Cliffs here
have a thickness of nearly 2,000 feet, and 47 different shades of color
have been distinguished.

The heavily forested rim attains an altitude of 10,700 feet. The cliffs
are white or orange at the top, breaking into tints of deep rose and
coral. The high elevation also affords an excellent distant view of
mountains and desert.

The Utah Parks Co. has provided a comfortable lodge with an attractive
dining room, lobby, and rest rooms. Sleeping accommodations are
available in cabins operated in connection with the lodge. Groceries,
campers' supplies, gasoline, and oil may be procured. Cedar Breaks Lodge
is open from about June 1 to September 20.

A free public campground is maintained where water, cooking fireplaces,
and fuel are furnished.

The season of accessibility varies with weather conditions, but is
usually from early June to the first of November. On account of the high
altitude, snows persist until late spring. During the summer season, the
National Park Service maintains an information office and small museum
near the parking area at Point Supreme.

    [Illustration: _Cedar Breaks_]

  "Let no one say, and say it to your shame,
  That all was beauty here until you came."

National parks are established "to conserve the scenery and the natural
and historic objects and the wildlife therein and to provide for the
enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave
them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations." Please
cooperate in maintaining and protecting this park. The following
observations are made for your guidance:

Preservation of Natural Features.--Trees, flowers, vegetation, rocks,
mineral formations, or any animal, bird, or other life may not be
disturbed, injured, or destroyed; and formations, rocks, and other
natural features may not be defaced by writing, carving, or otherwise
marring them. Since the park is a sanctuary for wildlife, hunting and
the use of firearms are prohibited.

Camping.--Camp only in established campgrounds. Keep your camping area
clean. Be Careful With Fire. Lunching and picnicking are permitted only
in public auto camp.

Disorderly Conduct.--Proper conduct is required of all visitors for the
benefit of others who are entitled to get the fullest possible enjoyment
from the park.

Pets.--If you are carrying a dog, cat, or other pet, you may take it
into and through the park provided it is at all times kept on leash or
otherwise under physical restrictive control. Pets are not permitted in
public buildings or on trails.

Trails.--Do not attempt to make short cuts; to do so you may endanger
yourself as well as others using the trails. Before attempting more
difficult trails seek advice from a park ranger.

Automobile Regulations.--(a) _Permit._--A charge of $1 for each
automobile is made at Bryce Canyon and Zion National Parks. One permit
is good for both parks, and may be used during the remainder of the year
in which issued. Trailer fee, $1 additional.

(b) _Careful driving._--The roads in the park are built purely for
scenic purposes, not as high-speed thoroughfares. Observe speed limits
and the usual rules of the road; keep to right; do not park on curves;
pass cars going in the same direction only when the road ahead is clear
and the vision unobstructed. The speed limit in the park is 35 miles per
hour.

Park Rangers.--The park rangers are employed to help and advise visitors
as well as to enforce regulations. When in doubt, ask a ranger.

   _For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing
       Office, Washington 25, D. C.--Price $3.75 per 100 copies_

                                        U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                                REPRINT 1952 O-F--980327




                                Footnote


[1]Condensed from "A Geologic and Geographic Sketch of Bryce Canyon
    National Park" by Herbert E. Gregory.




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Silently corrected a few typos.

--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah (1952), by 
Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRYCE CANYON NATIONAL PARK ***

***** This file should be named 59881-8.txt or 59881-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/8/59881/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

